Initial edits for GPU page (#36)
pypackaging-native/pypackaging-native: docs/key-issues/gpus.md

## Current state

As of May 2023, PyPI and Python packaging tools are completely unaware of
GPUs, and of CUDA. There is no way to mark a package as needing a GPU in sdist
or wheel metadata, or as containing GPU-specific code (CUDA or otherwise). A
GPU is hardware that may or may not be present in a machine that a Python
package is being installed on - `pip` and other installers are unaware of this.

> If wheels contain CUDA code, they require the CUDA Toolkit (a specific version

Reviewer: Can you add (CTK) as the abbreviation here? It's used further down like that.

> of it at that) to be installed. Again, installers do not know this and there is

Reviewer 2: Not sure what "a specific version of it _at that_" refers to?

Reviewer: It simply means there are version constraints, you must know if it's CUDA `11`, `12`, or even a more specific minor version like `11.1`. Maybe _"they require a specific version of the CUDA Toolkit"_ would be clearer?

Author: Perhaps there's just a lack of familiarity with this phrasing at play here? Does [this ref](https://idioms.thefreedictionary.com/at+that) help? In any case, happy to go with Ralf's rewording.

no way to express this dependency. The same will be true for ROCm and other
types of GPU hardware and languages.

NVIDIA has made steps towards better support for CUDA on PyPI. Various
library components of the CTK have been packaged as wheels and are now
distributed on PyPI, such as

> [nvidia-cublas-cu11](https://pypi.org/project/nvidia-cublas-cu11/). Python

Reviewer 2: btw for the wheel mention, we could add one sentence hyperlinking to the section (not on this page) "Lack of support for symlinks in wheels", such as the following
```
, such as [nvidia-cublas-cu11](https://pypi.org/project/nvidia-cublas-cu11/), although special care is needed to consume them due to [lack of symlinks in wheels](...).
```

Author: Done.

> wrappers around CUDA libraries have been consolidated into CUDA Python

Reviewer 2: Thinking it twice, I feel we may need to phrase it differently. CUDA Python only offers wrappers for driver/runtime/nvrtc, and not CUDA libraries (cuBLAS & co) yet. Maybe changing CUDA "libraries" to CUDA "APIs"?

Author: I added that as well as an additional parenthetical afterwards to indicate that there are no bindings for the libraries as of yet.

([website](https://developer.nvidia.com/cuda-python), 
[PyPI package](https://pypi.org/project/cuda-python)), but this package assumes

> that the CUDA runtime and driver are already installed since it only provides
> Python bindings to the API. Many other projects remain hosted on

Reviewer 2: nit:
```suggestion
that the CUDA driver and NVRTC are already installed since it only provides
Python bindings to the APIs. Many other projects remain hosted on
```

CUDA versions get released regularly, and - because they come with increased
performance or new functionality - it may be necessary or desirable to build
new wheels for that CUDA version. If only the supported CUDA version is
different between two wheels, the wheel tags and filename will be identical.
Hence it is not possible to upload more than one of those wheels under the same
package name.

Historically, this required projects to produce packages specific CUDA minor
versions. Projects would either support only one CUDA version on PyPI, or create
different packages. PyTorch and TensorFlow do the former, with TensorFlow
supporting only a single CUDA version, and PyTorch providing more wheels for
other CUDA versions and a CPU-only version in a separate wheelhouse (see
[pytorch.org/get-started](https://pytorch.org/get-started/locally/)).
CuPy provides a number of packages: [`cupy`](https://pypi.org/project/cupy/),
[`cupy-cuda102`](https://pypi.org/project/cupy-cuda102/),
[`cupy-cuda110`](https://pypi.org/project/cupy-cuda1110/),
[`cupy-cuda111`](https://pypi.org/project/cupy-cuda111/),
[`cupy-rocm-4-3`](https://pypi.org/project/cupy-rocm-4-3/),

> [`cupy-rocm-5-0`](https://pypi.org/project/cupy-rocm-5-0/).

Reviewer 2: I am thinking to add a sentence or two here explaining why it's painful to everyone.
```suggestion
[`cupy-rocm-5-0`](https://pypi.org/project/cupy-rocm-5-0/). This not only adds maintenance
overhead to project developers and consumes more storage and network bandwidth for PyPI.org,
but also prevents downstream projects from properly declaring the dependency.
```

> As of CUDA 11, CUDA promises [minor version

Reviewer: IIRC the first version to actually achieve this was CUDA 11.2. Is that right? If so, it may be worth adding ".2"

Reviewer 2: Technically it starts with 11.0, with the exception of NVRTC (which CuPy et al depends on) until 11.2. Also, minor ver compat in CUDA 11 does not cover PTX compilation. Not sure if theses technical details are important here. No strong opinion.

Reviewer: Maybe as a footnote? Seems like the kind of thing that the majority of folks aren't interested in, but if you need it it's quite important and not easy to find.

Author: Hmm yeah this is a bit tricky. How deep into the weeds do we want to get here? If we mention PTX compilation, should we also mention that this is specifically an issue for `numba.cuda`, which provides additional plugins to get around this (the ptxcompiler and cubinlinker packages)? Do we want to mention the constraints for any other package that distributes PTX code (they need to restrict the PTX to instructions compiled for the oldest driver they want to use, which in practice means they probably need to compile on the oldest runtime they want to use, within a given major version)? What about how that applies to JIT outside of numba (for instance cupy has the ability to JIT, although I think in the long run there is interest in consolidating with numba, Leo could say more here)?

Author: Also the differences between CUDA 10 (which I imagine many stacks are still using somewhere), CUDA 11, and CUDA 12?

Reviewer: If we could add the compat details and the PTX issue, with perhaps a link to a relevant Numba issue, in a footnote that would be really nice. It's the kind of info that is very difficult to find and hence valuable to have available.

CUDA 10 I'm less sure about, I'd be fine with leaving it out on the basis everyone is moving or has moved away from it.

compatibility](https://docs.nvidia.com/deploy/cuda-compatibility/index.html#minor-version-compatibility),

> which allows building packages compatibility across an entire CUDA major

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
which allows building packages compatible across an entire CUDA major
```

version. CuPy now leverages this to produce wheels like 
[`cupy-cuda11x`](https://pypi.org/project/cupy-cuda11x/) and
[`cupy-cuda12x`](https://pypi.org/project/cupy-cuda12x/) that work for any CUDA
11.x or CUDA 12.x version, respectively, that a user has installed.

> GPU packages tend to result in very large wheels. This is in large part because

Reviewer 2: nit
```suggestion
GPU packages tend to result in very large wheels. This is mainly because
```

compiled GPU libraries must support a number of architectures, leading to large
binary sizes. These effects are compounded by the requirements imposed by the

> manylinux standard for Linux wheels, which results in many large libraries being

Reviewer 2: I wonder if we should add a link to the "Depending on packages for which an ABI matters" section (on another page) since we're touching manylinux here. No strong opinion, though.

Author: I'm not opposed, but I'm not sure exactly how that would look here. Perhaps just a "see also [the notes on ABI compatibility](...)"?

Reviewer: I think it's actually more this page where vendoring requirements are explained: https://pypackaging-native.github.io/key-issues/native-dependencies/. So I suggest adding:
```
(see [Native dependencies](native-dependencies) for details)
```

## Current state

> As of May 2023, PyPI and Python packaging tools are completely unaware of

Reviewer 3: Months pass quickly (hey, it's June already!). How about the "As of mid 2023"?

Author: Good call, updated.

GPUs, and of CUDA. There is no way to mark a package as needing a GPU in sdist
or wheel metadata, or as containing GPU-specific code (CUDA or otherwise). A
GPU is hardware that may or may not be present in a machine that a Python
package is being installed on - `pip` and other installers are unaware of this.
If wheels contain CUDA code, they require a specific version of the CUDA
Toolkit (CTK) to be installed. Again, installers do not know this and there is
no way to express this dependency. The same will be true for ROCm and other
types of GPU hardware and languages.

NVIDIA has made steps towards better support for CUDA on PyPI. Various
library components of the CTK have been packaged as wheels and are now
distributed on PyPI, such as
[nvidia-cublas-cu11](https://pypi.org/project/nvidia-cublas-cu11/), although
special care is needed to consume them due to [lack of symlinks in

> wheels](native-dependencies/cpp_deps.md#current-state). Python wrappers around

Reviewer 2: The hyperlink is used to refer to the fact (lack of symlink), not to what special care is needed

> wheels](native-dependencies/cpp_deps.md#current-state). Python wrappers around

Author: Do either of you see a potential change here that would improve clarity?

> wheels](native-dependencies/cpp_deps.md#current-state). Python wrappers around

Author: We discussed this offline and concluded that the current wording is good enough for now.

CUDA runtime and driver APIs have been consolidated into CUDA Python
([website](https://developer.nvidia.com/cuda-python), [PyPI
package](https://pypi.org/project/cuda-python)), but this package assumes that
the CUDA driver and NVRTC are already installed since it only provides Python
bindings to the APIs (and no bindings for CUDA libraries are provided as of

> yet). Many other projects remain hosted on [NVIDIA's Private PyPI

Reviewer 4: I know the project description page describes this as "the NVIDIA Private Python Package Index", but does the word "private" convey something else? I'd assume that a "private" index would require some sort of explicit authorization or be inaccessible to the general public - would putting

```suggestion
yet). Many other projects remain hosted on [NVIDIA's PyPI
```

instead convey the idea more straightforwardly? (or is "Private PyPI" a generally-understood term I've not come across before?)

Index](https://pypi.org/project/nvidia-pyindex/), which also includes rebuilds
of TensorFlow and other packages.

A single CUDA version supports a reasonable range of GPU architectures. New

> CUDA versions get released regularly, and - because they come with increased
> performance or new functionality - it may be necessary or desirable to build

Reviewer 4: I know you didn't modify this, but as-is it's hard to parse - how about

```suggestion
CUDA versions get released regularly, and because they come with increased
performance or new functionality it may be necessary or desirable to build
```

new wheels for that CUDA version. If only the supported CUDA version is
different between two wheels, the wheel tags and filename will be identical.
Hence it is not possible to upload more than one of those wheels under the same
package name.

> Historically, this required projects to produce packages specific CUDA minor

Author: Used "to". Thanks, I missed this typo.

versions. Projects would either support only one CUDA version on PyPI, or create
different packages. PyTorch and TensorFlow do the former, with TensorFlow
supporting only a single CUDA version, and PyTorch providing more wheels for
other CUDA versions and a CPU-only version in a separate wheelhouse (see
[pytorch.org/get-started](https://pytorch.org/get-started/locally/)).

> CuPy provides a number of packages: [`cupy`](https://pypi.org/project/cupy/),

Author: Fair point, avoiding mention of it does make sense.

[`cupy-cuda102`](https://pypi.org/project/cupy-cuda102/),
[`cupy-cuda110`](https://pypi.org/project/cupy-cuda1110/),
[`cupy-cuda111`](https://pypi.org/project/cupy-cuda111/),
[`cupy-rocm-4-3`](https://pypi.org/project/cupy-rocm-4-3/),
[`cupy-rocm-5-0`](https://pypi.org/project/cupy-rocm-5-0/).
This works, but adds maintenance overhead to project developers and consumes
more storage and network bandwidth for PyPI.org. Moreover, it also prevents
downstream projects from properly declaring the dependency unless they also

> follow a similar multi-package approach. As of CUDA 11, CUDA promises

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
follow a similar multi-package approach. As of CUDA 11.2, CUDA promises
```
If I'm not mistaken, this only started with 11.2

Reviewer 2: Depend on which component you're referring to. For NVRTC, yes.

> [minor version
> compatibility](https://docs.nvidia.com/deploy/cuda-compatibility/index.html#minor-version-compatibility),

Reviewer 4: This is the first use of Minor Version Compatibility, so it should define the acronym:

```suggestion
[Minor Version Compatibility
(MVC)](https://docs.nvidia.com/deploy/cuda-compatibility/index.html#minor-version-compatibility),
```

which allows building packages compatible across an entire CUDA major

> version. CuPy now leverages this to produce wheels like 

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
version. For example, CuPy now leverages this to produce wheels like 
```

[`cupy-cuda11x`](https://pypi.org/project/cupy-cuda11x/) and
[`cupy-cuda12x`](https://pypi.org/project/cupy-cuda12x/) that work for any CUDA

> 11.x or CUDA 12.x version, respectively, that a user has installed. Libraries

Reviewer 4: It feels like the commas unnecessarily break up the flow:

```suggestion
11.x or CUDA 12.x version respectively that a user has installed. Libraries
```

> 11.x or CUDA 12.x version, respectively, that a user has installed. Libraries
> that package PTX code cannot take advantage of this process yet, however ([see
> below](#additional-notes-on-cuda-compatibility)).

Reviewer 4: Does this read a little more straightforwardly?

```suggestion
11.x or CUDA 12.x version, respectively, that a user has installed. However,
libraries that package PTX code cannot take advantage of this process yet
([see below](#additional-notes-on-cuda-compatibility)).
```

GPU packages tend to result in very large wheels. This is mainly because
compiled GPU libraries must support a number of architectures, leading to large
binary sizes. These effects are compounded by the requirements imposed by the
manylinux standard for Linux wheels, which results in many large libraries being
bundled into a single wheel (see [Native dependencies](native-dependencies) for
details). This is true in particular for deep learning packages because they
link in [cuDNN](https://developer.nvidia.com/cudnn). For example, recent
`manylinux2014` wheels for TensorFlow are 588 MB ([2.11.0
files](https://pypi.org/project/tensorflow/2.11.0/#files)), and for PyTorch
those are 890 MB ([1.13.0

> files](https://pypi.org/project/torch/1.13.0/#files)). The problems around and

Reviewer 3: Can we call the links here "wheels for v2.11.0" and "wheels for v1.13.0"? I find "2.11.0 files" unintuitive.

Author: Agreed, changing.

## Relevant resources

> - [How cuQuantum builds wheels](https://github.com/NVIDIA/cuQuantum/tree/main/extra/demo_build_with_wheels)

Reviewer 2: I think this is more accurate:
```suggestion
- [How to use cuQuantum wheels](https://github.com/NVIDIA/cuQuantum/tree/main/extra/demo_build_with_wheels)
```

and
[here](https://docs.nvidia.com/cuda/cuda-c-best-practices-guide/index.html#distributing-the-cuda-runtime-and-libraries)
for more information).

CUDA drivers have always been backwards compatible. Any code that runs when
some driver version X is installed will always work correctly when run with
some newer driver version Y>X. As briefly discussed above, as of CUDA 11.0
CUDA also promises [minor version
compatibility](https://docs.nvidia.com/deploy/cuda-compatibility/index.html#minor-version-compatibility)
(MVC). This compatibility guarantees that CUDA code compiled using a certain
version of the CUDA toolkit will be compatible with any driver version within
the same major release. This behavior is useful because it is often easier for
users to upgrade their CUDA runtime than it is to upgrade the driver,
especially on shared machines. For instance, the CUDA toolkit may be installed
using conda, while the driver library cannot be. An example of leveraging MVC
would be compiling code against the CUDA 11.5 runtime library and then running
it on a system with a CUDA 11.2 driver installed. However there are some
caveats with MVC:

> - If the code uses any features that were introduced in a later driver version

Reviewer 4: Is `cuGetProcAddress`, introduced in CUDA 11.3, an exception to this? If I attempt to call it using `ctypes` in Python or `dlsym` in C, will I just get a normal linker error?

Reviewer 4: Now I think about it, is this a feature of the runtime, rather than a guarantee made for code that directly uses the driver API?

Author: Yeah I was under the impression that MVC only applies to the runtime API, not the driver API. We could test that though to be sure.

Reviewer 2: Minor ver compat applies to the UMD too.

Reviewer 4: Looking over the docs, I can't see anything that specifically talks about direct use of driver APIs - the closest thing I can find is in https://docs.nvidia.com/cuda/cuda-c-best-practices-guide/index.html#handling-new-cuda-features-and-driver-apis, which says:

> To use other CUDA APIs introduced in a minor release (that require a new driver), one would have to implement fallbacks or fail gracefully.

@leofang Have you seen anything that refers more specifically to driver APIs?

For my example of `cuGetProcAddress`, I've seen it suggested (elsewhere) that one should fall back to a platform-specific equivalent - e.g. `GetProcAddress()` on Windows, or `dlsym()` on Linux. Maybe we need to note here that direct use of driver APIs added in minor releases needs to be considered / guarded against appropriately, without being too prescriptive (since the thing to do could vary depending on what the API is and the application features / requirements).

Reviewer 2: Yes, we need fallbacks for new APIs introduced in the middle of a major version. But this is nothing unusual. MVC is basically reaffirming that CUDA is obeying semantic versioning IMHO, and it's OK to make non-breaking changes (ex: add new APIs) in a minor release, so I am not sure we should expand on this.

Author: If a new API is introduced in CUDA 12.2, then any code using it will need fallbacks/failure modes handling it when compiling on CUDA 12.0/12.1. That's true whether it's a runtime or driver API, which I think is also what Leo is saying.

I'm not really sure how minor version compatibility makes sense for the UMD. The driver APIs are implemented in the same library that provides the UMD (libcuda.so). How would you have a "newer" driver API installed than the UMD?

The whole point of MVC IIUC is that using code compiled against a specific libcudart won't automatically give linker errors if that libcudart finds an older libcuda on the system than the one it was compiled against.

  than the installed version, it will still fail to run. However, it will be a
  runtime failure in the form of a `cudaErrorCallRequiresNewerDriver` CUDA
  error, rather than a linker error or some similarly opaque issue. One
  solution to this problem is for libraries to use runtime checks of the CUDA
  version (using e.g. `cudaDriverGetVersion`) to only use supported features on
  the installed driver.

> - NVRTC did not start supporting MVC until CUDA 11.3. Therefore, code that uses

Reviewer 4: Additionally, I believe that you cannot use NVRTC to generate code that needs linking by the driver under MVC (e.g. when calling device functions from another translation unit) - it will produce a cubin, but the driver will refuse to add it to a link (with a cryptic error code, IIRC).

Author: Are there specific version constraints here? Is this true for any 11.x NVRTC?

Reviewer 4: I think it's true for any NVRTC that supports MVC, including in CUDA 12 - you would still need nvJitlink for MVC with linking.

Reviewer 2: This is my understanding:
- NVRTC -> compiler (CUDA C++ -> PTX or SASS)
- nvJitLink -> linker

and to support MVC we need both pieces, unless linking is not needed (ex: compiling a single TU) as Graham noted. 

That nvJitLink was missing in CUDA 11 is one reason that MVC could not cover a lot of PTX use cases. Another reason is that the UMD driver is responsible for compiling (JIT'ing) PTX to SASS, but if the PTX is generated with NVRTC newer than UMD (say, NVRTC from 11.6, UMD from 11.2), JIT'ing will fail, too. (Reason: Each CTK minor release bumps the PTX minor version -- yes, it has its own version -- so an old driver would simply not recognize the new code.) This was why CuPy had to compile down to SASS with NVRTC.

Author: Hmm @leofang [this diagram](https://docs.nvidia.com/deploy/cuda-compatibility/index.html#deployment-considerations) indicates 11.3, not 11.2. Is it wrong?

Aside from that this discussion makes sense though, will update.

Author: The single TU + no linking restriction is now mentioned below.

  NVRTC for JIT compilation must have been compiled with a CUDA version >= 11.3.

> - MVC only applies to CUDA code, not

Reviewer 4: I think this is the specific code you mean here?

```suggestion
- MVC only applies to SASS binary code, not
```

  [PTX](https://docs.nvidia.com/cuda/parallel-thread-execution/). PTX is an
  instruction set that the CUDA driver library can JIT-compile to machine
  instructions. The standard [CUDA compilation
  pipeline](https://docs.nvidia.com/cuda/cuda-compiler-driver-nvcc/index.html#the-cuda-compilation-trajectory)

>   includes the translation of CUDA code into PTX, but in addition developers

Reviewer 4: "code" alone is a little vague:

```suggestion
  includes the translation of CUDA source code into PTX, but in addition developers
```

>   may write PTX code directly rather than CUDA for performance since it offers

Reviewer 4: I think suggesting the two use cases upfront makes the rest of the paragraph easier to digest:

```suggestion
  may write PTX code directly for performance, or use code generation tools that produce PTX, since it offers
```

  avenues for optimization that are either unavailable or very difficult to

>   access with CUDA C(++). However, since PTX code does not support MVC, PTX

Reviewer 4: I think this is a more common idiom - I've not come across `(++)` usage (much?) before

```suggestion
  access with CUDA C/C++. However, since PTX code does not support MVC, PTX
```

Reviewer 4: Also, I think the supporter / supported feels inverted here:

```suggestion
  access with CUDA C(++). However, since MVC does not support PTX code, PTX
```

>   compiled with a particular CUDA runtime may not work if run on a system with

Reviewer 4: As I think of it, NVCC and NVRTC (via NVVM) are toolkit components that generate the PTX - I think suggesting the "runtime" generates it feels confusing.

```suggestion
  generated using a particular CUDA toolkit may not work if run on a system with
```

Author: Good call, I agree I'm conflating the two a bit here.

  an older driver. This fact has two consequences. First, libraries that
  package PTX code will not benefit from MVC. Second, libraries that leverage
  any sort of JIT-compilation pipeline that generates PTX code will _also_ not
  support MVC. The latter can lead to more surprising behaviors, such as if a

>   user has a newer CUDA runtime than driver and then uses

Reviewer 4: Another use of "runtime", where I think the toolkit version is really what's important:

```suggestion
  user has a newer CUDA toolkit than driver and then uses
```

  [numba.cuda](https://numba.pydata.org/) to compile a Python function since
  numba compiles CUDA kernels to PTX as part of its pipeline. Prior to CUDA

>   12, CUDA itself provides no solutions to this problem, although in some cases

Reviewer 4: I don't think this is strictly true - since 11.1 or 11.2 (I can't recall exactly when) `libnvptxcompiler_static.a` has been bundled with the toolkit in order to support JIT compilation of PTX for older drivers than the toolkit used for the build - the build links in `libnvptxcompiler_static.a` and uses it to compile PTX bundled or generated at runtime. [PTX Compiler APIs](https://docs.nvidia.com/cuda/ptx-compiler-api/index.html) documents the usage of the library and API. The addition RAPIDS made on top of this was to build a Pythonic binding capable of patching Numba to use its bundled version of libnvptxcompiler_static which we build with 11.8, so it can always compile any 11.x PTX (because 11.8 was the last 11.x release).

This is only a partial solution - if multiple PTX files need to be linked, then there isn't an official general solution, but RAPIDS also provides the cubinlinker package, which provides a Pythonic binding to some internal APIs to address both PTX compilation and linking.

Author: True, there are some partial solutions available. IMO the distinction between compiling a single PTX file and linking multiple is too deep in the weeds even for this document. I personally wouldn't even know how to describe exactly when the former is sufficient and when the latter would be necessary. I'd love to fill that gap in my own knowledge, but I think adding that here at this point would be a bit too overwhelming for readers who aren't familiar with the entire CUDA compilation pipeline.

Do you think there's a reasonable middle ground in what can be stated here? In particular, if we focus on it from the perspective of a developer trying to make their package run: for what use cases are the PTX compiler APIs sufficient, and when would something like cubinlinker be required?

Reviewer 4: > Is it accurate to state that this basically means that PTX functions cannot call PTX functions from another TU?

It's accurate, but it also doesn't elaborate on the implications. That TU might be from another PTX file provided by the user, or it might be in a library distributed as part of the toolkit, e.g. `libcudadevrt.a`, which contains functions used e.g. for dynamic parallellism or cooperative groups. So it also means that certain CUDA functionality becomes unavailable.

Reviewer 4: > Can CUDA source code from another TU call PTX functions compiled using the PTX compiler API, or is the limitation bidirectional?

The limitation is bidirectional, because you can't add anything compiled for MVC to a link.

Reviewer 4: > I assume that the latter works, otherwise it's fairly useless to have a completely isolated compilation unit that is JIT-compiled but can't be used by anything else.

The majority of Numba functionality can be supported in this way, it's not completely useless :slightly_smiling_face: - just not cooperative groups and linking C/C++ device code.

> I'd love to fill that gap in my own knowledge, but I think adding that here at this point would be a bit too overwhelming for readers who aren't familiar with the entire CUDA compilation pipeline.

Indeed, it is very complicated to spell out exactly what is and isn't possible, especially in generic terms and not "which subset of Numba can work in this case".

> Do you think there's a reasonable middle ground in what can be stated here? In particular, if we focus on it from the perspective of a developer trying to make their package run: for what use cases are the PTX compiler APIs sufficient, and when would something like cubinlinker be required?

I think maybe the middle ground just looks like this:

> CUDA itself provides no **general** solutions to this problem

(addition of the word "general") and leaving it at that, otherwise we end up discussing all these nuances and losing the wood for trees.

Author: OK sounds good. Done.

Author: I'm confused at how numba works given the bidirectionality. If a numba-compiled kernel can't link to anything or be linked to, how does anything call it?

  there are tools that may be used to help (for instance, numba supports MVC in
  CUDA 11 [starting with numba
  0.57](https://numba.readthedocs.io/en/stable/release-notes.html#version-0-57-0-1-may-2023).
  CUDA 12 introduces the
  [nvJitLink](https://docs.nvidia.com/cuda/nvjitlink/index.html) library as the

>   long-term solution to this problem. nvJitLink may be leveraged to compile PTX

Reviewer 4: It does, but the Python binding is still WIP (https://github.com/gmarkall/nvjitlink) and Numba and any other applications will need modification to use it.

Author: I think we can probably leave that link out for now and simply state that Python bindings do not exist yet, then update the page when they do. Otherwise we'll be sending readers down a potentially unhelpful rabbit hole, especially if the bindings move into a different org or library over time.

Reviewer 2: nvJitLink is the ultimate solution, but with its own caveats. To link together different pieces generated from different minor CTK versions, it requires to use nvJitLink coming from a CTK whose minor version is higher than those of all participating pieces (see the [CUDA minor version compatibility](https://developer.nvidia.com/blog/cuda-12-0-compiler-support-for-runtime-lto-using-nvjitlink-library/) section; need to search in the article, as there's no direct hyperlink, unfortunately). Ex: if I'm linking pieces generated from CTK 12.0, 12.1, and 12.2, I need to use nvJitLink from 12.2+.

Reviewer 4: > I think we can probably leave that link out for now and simply state that Python bindings do not exist yet, then update the page when they do. Otherwise we'll be sending readers down a potentially unhelpful rabbit hole, especially if the bindings move into a different org or library over time.

Indeed, I didn't intend to imply we should add that link - just pointing to where the current state of things is :-)

- make an environment marker or selector package approach work,
- improve interoperability with other package managers, in order to be able to
  declare a dependency on a CUDA or ROCm version as externally provided,

> ## Additional Notes on CUDA Compatibility

Author: Alternatively I could just drop the `.so` and use `libcudart` and `libcuda` without suffixes, WDYT?

> ## Additional Notes on CUDA Compatibility

Reviewer 2: Even the prefix "lib" is Unix-only (ex: `libcuda.so` is called `nvcuda.dll` 😇), I wouldn't bother...

> ## Additional Notes on CUDA Compatibility

Author: Good point, I wasn't thinking about that but you're absolutely right. I'll leave it as is for now.

Compatibility across CUDA versions is a common problem with numerous pitfalls to be aware of.
There are three primary components of CUDA:

1. The CUDA Toolkit (CTK): This component includes the CUDA runtime library
   (libcudart.so) along with a range of other libraries and tools including
   math libraries like cuBlas. libcudart.so and a few other core headers and
   libraries compose the bare minimum required to compile CUDA code.
2. The user-mode driver: This is the libcuda.so library. This library is
   required to actually run CUDA code.
3. The kernel-mode driver: The nvidia.ko file. This constitutes what is
   typically considered a "driver" in common parlance when referring to other
   peripherals connected to a computer.

> CUDA developers and users generally do not need to be aware of the kernel-mode driver.

Author: I would argue that CUDA forward compat is only relevant for HPC _admins_, whereas users and developers do not usually care about it. I would like to leave forward compat out of this discussion altogether to avoid muddying the waters.

> CUDA developers and users generally do not need to be aware of the kernel-mode driver.

Reviewer 2: Following up here: https://github.com/pypackaging-native/pypackaging-native/pull/36#discussion_r1239276086

> CUDA developers and users generally do not need to be aware of the kernel-mode driver.

Author: Resolved on the other thread.

may not work correctly if they are run on a system with a different CUDA
runtime shared library than the one they were compiled against. In this scenario,
users are responsible for having the right CUDA runtime library installed.  As
a result, the official CUDA recommendation is to statically link the CUDA
runtime (see
[here](https://docs.nvidia.com/cuda/cuda-c-best-practices-guide/index.html#recommendations-for-building-a-minor-version-compatible-library)
and
[here](https://docs.nvidia.com/cuda/cuda-c-best-practices-guide/index.html#distributing-the-cuda-runtime-and-libraries)
for more information).

CUDA drivers have always been backwards compatible. Any code that runs when
some driver version X is installed will always work correctly when run with
some newer driver version Y>X. As briefly discussed above, as of CUDA 11.0
CUDA also promises [minor version
compatibility](https://docs.nvidia.com/deploy/cuda-compatibility/index.html#minor-version-compatibility)
(MVC). This compatibility guarantees that CUDA code compiled using a certain
version of the CUDA toolkit will be compatible with any driver version within

> the same major release. This behavior is useful because it is often easier for

Reviewer 4: What is "the minimal requirement" in this context?

> version of the CUDA toolkit will be compatible with any driver version within
> the same major release. This behavior is useful because it is often easier for

Reviewer 4: Should this then say something like:

```suggestion
version of the CUDA toolkit will be compatible with any driver version above
the minimal requirement specified for MVC with that toolkit. This behavior is useful because it is often easier for
```

I'm not super happy with my suggestion - it's a bit of a mouthful - but otherwise I think it's a bit confusing what the minimal requirement is or where to look for it.

> the same major release. This behavior is useful because it is often easier for

Author: Alternatively we could just link to [the official table](https://docs.nvidia.com/deploy/cuda-compatibility/index.html#default-to-minor-version). Then we don't have to maintain much.

What @leofang said above is indeed a more precise statement, but only because MVC was only imperfectly included in the first few releases of CUDA 11. For future versions I would expect all the above statements to be equivalent because the earliest official release for major version X will have a UMD compatible with all later minor CTKs.

especially on shared machines. For instance, the CUDA toolkit may be installed
using conda, while the driver library cannot be. An example of leveraging MVC
would be compiling code against the CUDA 11.5 runtime library and then running
it on a system with a CUDA 11.2 driver installed. However there are some
caveats with MVC:

- If CUDA source code uses any features that were introduced in a later driver
  version than the installed version, it will still fail to run. However, it
  will be a runtime failure in the form of a `cudaErrorCallRequiresNewerDriver`
  CUDA error, rather than a linker error or some similarly opaque issue. One
  solution to this problem is for libraries to use runtime checks of the CUDA
  version (using e.g. `cudaDriverGetVersion`) to only use supported features on
  the installed driver.
- NVRTC did not start supporting MVC until CUDA 11.3. Therefore, code that uses
  NVRTC for JIT compilation must have been compiled with a CUDA version >= 11.3.
- MVC only applies to SASS binary code, not
  [PTX](https://docs.nvidia.com/cuda/parallel-thread-execution/). PTX is an
  instruction set that the CUDA driver library can JIT-compile to machine

>   instructions. The standard [CUDA compilation

Author: Edited the beginning of this bullet instead to clarify what SASS is.

  pipeline](https://docs.nvidia.com/cuda/cuda-compiler-driver-nvcc/index.html#the-cuda-compilation-trajectory)

>   includes the translation of CUDA source code into PTX. In addition, to
>   achieve the best performance, developers may write PTX code directly or use
>   code generation tools that produce PTX because it offers avenues for
>   optimization that are either unavailable or very difficult to access with
>   CUDA C/C++.  However, since MVC does not support PTX code, PTX generated

Reviewer 2: While this is true, I think it's really too detailed. We simply wanna mention that some projects choose to generate PTX here, without justifying for them. I suggest the following change:
```suggestion
  includes the translation of CUDA source code into PTX. In addition, some projects
  choose to include PTX code generated either at build time or run time.
  However, since MVC does not cover JIT'ing PTX code, PTX generated
```

>   using a particular CUDA toolkit may not work if run on a system with an older
>   driver.  This fact has two consequences. First, libraries that package PTX

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
  using a particular CTK may not work with an older driver. 
  This fact has two consequences. First, libraries that package PTX
```

  code will not benefit from MVC. Second, libraries that leverage any sort of
  JIT-compilation pipeline that generates PTX code will _also_ not support MVC.

>   The latter can lead to more surprising behaviors, such as if a user has a

Reviewer 2: I think we meant "when" not "if" here, because we didn't mention how the behavior is surprising?
```suggestion
  The latter can lead to more surprising behaviors, such as when a user has a
```

>   newer CUDA toolkit than driver and then uses

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
  newer CTK than the installed driver and then uses
```

  [numba.cuda](https://numba.pydata.org/) to compile a Python function since

>   numba compiles CUDA kernels to PTX as part of its pipeline. Prior to CUDA 12,

Reviewer 2: Is this really true? @gmarkall I thought Numba usually bypasses PTX generation, unless compiling CUDA C++ headers or linking to other TUs that provide device functions is needed?

Reviewer 4: Yes, it's true - Numba's pipeline goes:

Python source -> Python bytecode -> Numba IR -> LLVM (NVVM) IR -> PTX -> SASS.

When CUDA C++ headers are compiled, they are compiled to PTX then SASS, then linked.

I think a common misunderstanding I've tried to correct before is that people thought Numba translated Python source into CUDA C++ source (like how Warp or CuPy's Python JIT do, IIRC) - could this be what you're thinking of?

  CUDA itself provides no solutions to this problem, although in some cases

>   there are tools that may be used to help (for instance, numba supports MVC in

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
  there are tools that may help (for instance, Numba supports MVC in
```

- make an environment marker or selector package approach work,
- improve interoperability with other package managers, in order to be able to
  declare a dependency on a CUDA or ROCm version as externally provided,

## Additional Notes on CUDA Compatibility

Compatibility across CUDA versions is a common problem with numerous pitfalls to be aware of.
There are three primary components of CUDA:

1. The CUDA Toolkit (CTK): This component includes the CUDA runtime library
   (libcudart.so) along with a range of other libraries and tools including

>    math libraries like cuBLAS. libcudart.so and a few other core headers and
>    libraries compose the bare minimum required to compile CUDA code.

Reviewer 4: Shared objects aren't involved in compilation - is this more accurate (or needlessly pedantic?)?

```suggestion
   math libraries like cuBLAS. libcudart.so and a few other core headers and
   libraries are the bare minimum required to compile and link CUDA code.
```

> 2. The user-mode driver: This is the libcuda.so library. This library is

Reviewer 4: "UMD" and "KMD" are acronyms commonly used, so I wonder if it is helpful to define them here to help the user spot their meaning when studying related docs:

```suggestion
2. The User-Mode Driver (UMD): This is the libcuda.so library. This library is
```

>    required to actually run CUDA code.

Reviewer 4: In contrast to compiling and linking (from point 1 just above), does this explain more explicitly what it does?

```suggestion
   required to load and run CUDA code.
```

> 3. The kernel-mode driver: The nvidia.ko file. This constitutes what is

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
3. The Kernel-Mode Driver (KMD): The nvidia.ko file. This constitutes what is
```

   typically considered a "driver" in common parlance when referring to other
   peripherals connected to a computer.

> CUDA developers and users usually do not need to be aware of the KMD.
> For the rest of this section, when referring to the "driver" we will always be referring to the UMD.

Reviewer 2: Sorry, I still don't feel comfortable about the claim that "don't need to be aware of KMD." People who own a workstation under their desk (like I did) would likely disagree, because this bites users from time to time. Can we rephrase it this way? 
```suggestion
As far as MVC is concerned, KMD can be ignored providing that it meets [CUDA's requirement](https://docs.nvidia.com/deploy/cuda-compatibility/index.html).
For the rest of this section, therefore, the "driver" and the UMD are considered interchangeable.
```

Author: Fair enough, you're right. I've definitely observed >0 issues with that before, so it can't be ignored altogether. I'll adopt your rewriting of the first sentence.

> CUDA developers and users usually do not need to be aware of the kernel-mode driver.
> For the rest of this section, when referring to the "driver" we will always be referring to the user-mode driver libcuda.so.

Reviewer 4: Small edits for clarity:

```suggestion
CUDA developers and users usually do not need to be aware of the Kernel-Mode Driver.
For the rest of this section, when referring to the "driver" we will always be referring to the User-Mode Driver, libcuda.so.
```

Reviewer 2: If acronyms are already defined at this point, let's just use them as much as we can.

The CUDA runtime library makes no forward or backward compatibility

> guarantees, meaning that libraries that dynamically link to the CUDA runtime

Reviewer 2: (Just leaving a comment, no change is needed.) TBH it's surprising that the CUDA docs described it this way. I would think it's not carefully worded. If cudart had not followed the SemVer semantics for API/ABI compatibility across minor versions (which it actually does), there would have been all sorts of issues.

Author: Yeah I agree that the wording is surprising and that there's definitely pretty strong compatibility. I think it's more that the CUDA team reserves the right to break this if needed, and historically they may have taken more advantage of that, but nowadays they have too many people relying on ABI compatibility to break it in practice even though they reserve the right to do so in theory.

may not work correctly if they are run on a system with a different CUDA
runtime shared library than the one they were compiled against. In this scenario,
users are responsible for having the right CUDA runtime library installed.  As
a result, the official CUDA recommendation is to statically link the CUDA
runtime (see
[here](https://docs.nvidia.com/cuda/cuda-c-best-practices-guide/index.html#recommendations-for-building-a-minor-version-compatible-library)
and
[here](https://docs.nvidia.com/cuda/cuda-c-best-practices-guide/index.html#distributing-the-cuda-runtime-and-libraries)
for more information).

CUDA drivers have always been backward compatible. Any code that runs with some
driver version X is installed will always run correctly with some newer driver

> version Y>X. As briefly discussed above, as of CUDA 11.0 CUDA also promises

Reviewer 3: 11.2 again?

[minor version
compatibility](https://docs.nvidia.com/deploy/cuda-compatibility/index.html#minor-version-compatibility)
(MVC). This compatibility guarantees that CUDA code compiled using a certain
version of the CTK will be compatible with any driver version within the same
major release. This behavior is useful because it is often easier for users to
upgrade their CUDA runtime than it is to upgrade the driver, especially on
shared machines. For instance, the CTK may be installed using conda, while the

> driver library cannot be. An example of leveraging MVC would be compiling code

Reviewer 3: This is changing nowadays. NVidia is [working](https://github.com/conda-forge/staged-recipes/issues/21382) to redistribute its entire[^1] setup through conda-forge.

[^1]: AFAIU; I admit that I don't know if the actual driver library will be part of `cuda`, but it would be consistent with distributing pretty much everything else that used to not be redistributable.

Author: Yup, both Leo and I are deeply involved in that effort (FYI we are both NVIDIA employees). The driver library will unfortunately still not be part of the conda-forge offering, but the rest of the CTK will be on cf.

against the CUDA 11.5 runtime library and then running it on a system with a
CUDA 11.2 driver installed.

However there are some caveats with MVC:

- If CUDA source code uses any features that were introduced in a later driver
  version than the installed version, it will still fail to run. However, it
  will be a runtime failure in the form of a `cudaErrorCallRequiresNewerDriver`
  CUDA error, rather than a linker error or some similarly opaque issue. One

>   solution to this problem is for libraries to use runtime checks of the CUDA

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
  solution to this problem is for libraries to use runtime checks of the driver
```

  version (using e.g. `cudaDriverGetVersion`) to only use supported features on
  the installed driver.
- NVRTC did not start supporting MVC until CUDA 11.3. Therefore, code that uses
  NVRTC for JIT compilation must have been compiled with a CUDA version >=
  11.3. Moreover, NVRTC only works for a single translation unit because
  linking is not possible without nvJitLink (see below).
- MVC only applies to machine instructions (SASS), not
  [PTX](https://docs.nvidia.com/cuda/parallel-thread-execution/). PTX is an

>   instruction set that the CUDA driver library can JIT-compile to SASS). The

Reviewer 4: Stray closing parenthesis:
```suggestion
  instruction set that the CUDA driver library can JIT-compile to SASS. The
```

>   instruction set that the CUDA driver library can JIT-compile to SASS. The

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
  instruction set that the CUDA driver can JIT-compile to SASS. The
```

  standard [CUDA compilation
  pipeline](https://docs.nvidia.com/cuda/cuda-compiler-driver-nvcc/index.html#the-cuda-compilation-trajectory)
  includes the translation of CUDA source code into PTX. In addition, some
  projects choose to include PTX code generated either at build time or run
  time. However, since MVC does not cover JIT-compiled PTX code, PTX generated
  using a particular CTK may not work with an older
  driver.
  This fact has two consequences. First, libraries that package PTX
  code will not benefit from MVC. Second, libraries that leverage any sort of
  JIT-compilation pipeline that generates PTX code will _also_ not support MVC.
  The latter can lead to more surprising behaviors, such as when a user has a
  newer CTK than the installed driver and then uses
  [numba.cuda](https://numba.pydata.org/) to compile a Python function since
  Numba compiles CUDA kernels to PTX as part of its pipeline. Prior to CUDA 12,
  CUDA itself provides no general solutions to this problem, although in some
  cases there are tools that may help (for instance, Numba supports
  MVC in CUDA 11 [starting with numba

>   0.57](https://numba.readthedocs.io/en/stable/release-notes.html#version-0-57-0-1-may-2023).

Reviewer 2: missing enclosing )
```suggestion
  0.57](https://numba.readthedocs.io/en/stable/release-notes.html#version-0-57-0-1-may-2023)).
```

Author: Good find 😄

  solution to this problem is for libraries to use runtime checks of the CUDA
  version (using e.g. `cudaDriverGetVersion`) to only use supported features on
  the installed driver.
- NVRTC did not start supporting MVC until CUDA 11.3. Therefore, code that uses
  NVRTC for JIT compilation must have been compiled with a CUDA version >= 11.3.
- MVC only applies to CUDA code, not
  [PTX](https://docs.nvidia.com/cuda/parallel-thread-execution/). PTX is an
  instruction set that the CUDA driver library can JIT-compile to machine
  instructions. The standard [CUDA compilation
  pipeline](https://docs.nvidia.com/cuda/cuda-compiler-driver-nvcc/index.html#the-cuda-compilation-trajectory)
  includes the translation of CUDA code into PTX, but in addition developers
  may write PTX code directly rather than CUDA for performance since it offers
  avenues for optimization that are either unavailable or very difficult to
  access with CUDA C(++). However, since PTX code does not support MVC, PTX
  compiled with a particular CUDA runtime may not work if run on a system with
  an older driver. This fact has two consequences. First, libraries that

>   package CUDA code will not benefit from MVC. Second, libraries that leverage

Reviewer: This first consequence assumes that the library is shipped with PTX code, right? If not, I'm not sure I understand that sentence.
